docs/solvers.rst, before:

FDTD Solvers
============

The ``gds_fdtd`` package provides a modular FDTD solver architecture with support for multiple electromagnetic simulation backends. The solver system is built around an object-oriented design that allows for easy extension and maintenance.

Base Solver Class
-----------------

The :class:`~gds_fdtd.solver.fdtd_solver` serves as the abstract base class for all FDTD solver implementations. It provides common functionality and defines the interface that all solvers must implement.

Key Features:
- Standardized port representation via :class:`~gds_fdtd.solver.fdtd_port` objects
- Comprehensive logging system
- Modular field monitor system
- Automatic simulation domain calculation
- Parameter validation and error handling

.. code-block:: python

    from gds_fdtd.solver import fdtd_solver
    
    class MyCustomSolver(fdtd_solver):
        def setup(self):
            # Implementation specific setup
            pass
            
        def run(self):
            # Implementation specific simulation execution
            pass

Common Solver Parameters
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

All solvers share these common initialization parameters:

- ``component``: The photonic component to simulate
- ``tech``: Technology definition (materials, layers, etc.)
- ``wavelength_start/end``: Simulation wavelength range (μm)
- ``wavelength_points``: Number of frequency points
- ``mesh``: Mesh resolution (cells per wavelength)
- ``modes``: List of mode indices for multi-modal simulation
- ``field_monitors``: Field monitoring axes ('x', 'y', 'z')
- ``working_dir``: Directory for simulation files and logs

Tidy3D Solver
-------------

The :class:`~gds_fdtd.solver_tidy3d.fdtd_solver_tidy3d` provides integration with the Tidy3D cloud-based FDTD platform using the official ComponentModeler plugin.

Features:
- Official Tidy3D ComponentModeler integration for accurate S-matrix calculation
- Multi-modal S-parameter support (TE, TM, mode conversion)
- Cloud-based simulation execution
- Enhanced field visualization with Tidy3D-specific plotting
- Automatic source and monitor setup with proper normalization

.. code-block:: python

    from gds_fdtd.solver_tidy3d import fdtd_solver_tidy3d
    from gds_fdtd.core import parse_yaml_tech
    from gds_fdtd.simprocessor import load_component_from_tech
    from gds_fdtd.lyprocessor import load_cell
    
    # Load component and technology
    tech = parse_yaml_tech("tech_tidy3d.yaml")
    cell, layout = load_cell("device.gds", "crossing_te1550")
    component = load_component_from_tech(cell, tech)
    
    # Create Tidy3D solver
    solver = fdtd_solver_tidy3d(
        component=component,
        tech=tech,
        wavelength_start=1.5,
        wavelength_end=1.6,
        wavelength_points=100,
        modes=[1, 2],  # TE and TM modes
        field_monitors=["z"],
        visualize=True
    )
    
    # Run simulation
    solver.run()

Tidy3D Specific Parameters:
- ``visualize``: Enable/disable visualization during setup and results

Lumerical Solver
----------------

The :class:`~gds_fdtd.solver_lumerical.fdtd_solver_lumerical` provides integration with Lumerical FDTD for commercial-grade electromagnetic simulations.

Features:
- Full Lumerical FDTD integration
- GPU acceleration support
- Layer builder integration with technology files
- S-parameter sweep configuration
- Field monitor support

.. code-block:: python

    from gds_fdtd.solver_lumerical import fdtd_solver_lumerical
    
    # Create Lumerical solver
    solver = fdtd_solver_lumerical(
        component=component,
        tech=tech,
        wavelength_start=1.5,
        wavelength_end=1.6,
        wavelength_points=100,
        modes=[1, 2],
        gpu=True,  # Enable GPU acceleration
        boundary=["PML", "PML", "Metal"],
        symmetry=[0, 0, 1]  # Mirror symmetry in z
    )
    
    # Run simulation
    solver.run()

Lumerical Specific Parameters:
- ``gpu``: Enable GPU acceleration (Lumerical 2024 syntax)
- ``boundary``: Boundary conditions for each axis
- ``symmetry``: Symmetry conditions (0=none, 1=symmetric, -1=anti-symmetric)

Field Monitor System
--------------------

Both solvers feature a modular field monitor system for electromagnetic field visualization:

Base Field Monitor
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The :class:`~gds_fdtd.solver.fdtd_field_monitor` provides the base functionality:

.. code-block:: python

    # Access field monitors
    for monitor in solver.field_monitors_objs:
        print(f"Monitor: {monitor.name} ({monitor.monitor_type})")
        
        # Check if data is available
        if monitor.has_data():
            # Visualize fields
            monitor.visualize(freq=freq, field_component='E')
            
            # Get monitor information
            print(monitor.get_field_info())

Tidy3D Field Monitors
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Tidy3D solvers use specialized field monitors with enhanced visualization:

.. code-block:: python

    # Visualize all field monitors
    solver.visualize_field_monitors()
    
    # Access individual monitors
    z_monitor = solver.get_field_monitor("z_field")
    if z_monitor and z_monitor.has_data():
        z_monitor.visualize(field_component='E')

Logging System
--------------

All solvers feature comprehensive logging to files in the working directory:

.. code-block:: python

    # Logging is automatic - check working directory for log files
    import os
    log_files = [f for f in os.listdir(solver.working_dir) if f.endswith('.log')]
    print(f"Log files: {log_files}")
    
    # Manual logging
    solver.logger.info("Custom log message")

Log files contain:
- Detailed simulation setup information
- Parameter validation results
- Simulation progress and timing
- Error messages and debugging information
- Field monitor and S-parameter processing details

Solver Comparison
-----------------

.. list-table:: Solver Feature Comparison
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 30 35 35

   * - Feature
     - Tidy3D Solver
     - Lumerical Solver
   * - **Platform**
     - Cloud-based
     - Local/Commercial license
   * - **S-matrix Calculation**
     - ComponentModeler plugin
     - Built-in S-parameter sweep
   * - **Multi-modal Support**
     - Full TE/TM/conversion
     - Full TE/TM/conversion
   * - **GPU Acceleration**
     - Cloud automatic
     - Local GPU support
   * - **Field Visualization**
     - Enhanced Tidy3D plots
     - Lumerical native
   * - **Cost**
     - Pay-per-simulation
     - License required
   * - **Setup Complexity**
     - Minimal (cloud)
     - Installation required

Extending the Solver System
----------------------------

To add support for a new FDTD solver:

1. **Inherit from the base class:**

.. code-block:: python

    from gds_fdtd.solver import fdtd_solver
    
    class fdtd_solver_newsolver(fdtd_solver):
        def __init__(self, *args, **kwargs):
            super().__init__(*args, **kwargs)
            self.setup()

2. **Implement required abstract methods:**

.. code-block:: python

    def setup(self) -> None:
        """Setup the simulation."""
        self._validate_simulation_parameters()
        self._export_gds()
        # Solver-specific setup
        
    def run(self) -> None:
        """Run the simulation."""
        # Solver-specific execution
        
    def get_resources(self) -> None:
        """Get simulation resource requirements."""
        # Resource estimation
        
    def get_results(self) -> None:
        """Retrieve simulation results."""
        # Results processing
        
    def get_log(self) -> None:
        """Get simulation logs."""
        # Log retrieval

3. **Use modular components:**

.. code-block:: python

    # Create field monitors
    field_monitor = self.create_field_monitor_object("my_monitor", "z")
    
    # Access standardized ports
    for fdtd_port in self.fdtd_ports:
        # Port configuration using standardized interface
        pass

This modular approach ensures consistency across different solver backends while allowing for solver-specific optimizations and features.

Commit message:

Update documentation and prepare for v0.4.0 release
- Remove marketing language and icons from all documentation and code
- Update all documentation to be more natural and conversational
- Add complete release management system with scripts and automation
- Create CHANGELOG.md with migration guide from v0.3.x to v0.4.0
- Set up bump2version, Makefile, and GitHub Actions for releases
- Update all version numbers to 0.4.0
- Prepare for major release with new modular solver architecture

docs/solvers.rst, after:

FDTD Solvers
============

The ``gds_fdtd`` package lets you run FDTD simulations using different solvers without changing much of your code. Right now it supports Tidy3D and Lumerical, but you can add other solvers if needed.

Base Solver Class
-----------------

The :class:`~gds_fdtd.solver.fdtd_solver` serves as the abstract base class for all FDTD solver implementations. It provides common functionality and defines the interface that all solvers must implement.

What it does:
- Converts your component ports into a standard format
- Logs everything that happens during setup and simulation
- Manages field monitors for visualizing results
- Figures out how big your simulation domain needs to be
- Checks that your parameters make sense before running

.. code-block:: python

    from gds_fdtd.solver import fdtd_solver
    
    class MyCustomSolver(fdtd_solver):
        def setup(self):
            # Implementation specific setup
            pass
            
        def run(self):
            # Implementation specific simulation execution
            pass

Common Solver Parameters
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

All solvers share these common initialization parameters:

- ``component``: The photonic component to simulate
- ``tech``: Technology definition (materials, layers, etc.)
- ``wavelength_start/end``: Simulation wavelength range (μm)
- ``wavelength_points``: Number of frequency points
- ``mesh``: Mesh resolution (cells per wavelength)
- ``modes``: List of mode indices for multi-modal simulation
- ``field_monitors``: Field monitoring axes ('x', 'y', 'z')
- ``working_dir``: Directory for simulation files and logs

Tidy3D Solver
-------------

The :class:`~gds_fdtd.solver_tidy3d.fdtd_solver_tidy3d` provides integration with the Tidy3D cloud-based FDTD platform using the official ComponentModeler plugin.

What it does:
- Uses Tidy3D's ComponentModeler to calculate S-parameters correctly
- Handles multiple polarizations in one simulation
- Runs everything on their cloud servers
- Can plot field distributions using Tidy3D's plotting tools
- Sets up sources and monitors automatically

.. code-block:: python

    from gds_fdtd.solver_tidy3d import fdtd_solver_tidy3d
    from gds_fdtd.core import parse_yaml_tech
    from gds_fdtd.simprocessor import load_component_from_tech
    from gds_fdtd.lyprocessor import load_cell
    
    # Load component and technology
    tech = parse_yaml_tech("tech_tidy3d.yaml")
    cell, layout = load_cell("device.gds", "crossing_te1550")
    component = load_component_from_tech(cell, tech)
    
    # Create Tidy3D solver
    solver = fdtd_solver_tidy3d(
        component=component,
        tech=tech,
        wavelength_start=1.5,
        wavelength_end=1.6,
        wavelength_points=100,
        modes=[1, 2],  # TE and TM modes
        field_monitors=["z"],
        visualize=True
    )
    
    # Run simulation
    solver.run()

Tidy3D Specific Parameters:
- ``visualize``: Enable/disable visualization during setup and results

Lumerical Solver
----------------

The :class:`~gds_fdtd.solver_lumerical.fdtd_solver_lumerical` provides integration with Lumerical FDTD for commercial-grade electromagnetic simulations.

What it can do:
- Runs Lumerical FDTD simulations directly
- Uses GPU acceleration if you have it set up
- Builds 3D structures from your technology file
- Sets up S-parameter sweeps automatically
- Saves field data for visualization

.. code-block:: python

    from gds_fdtd.solver_lumerical import fdtd_solver_lumerical
    
    # Create Lumerical solver
    solver = fdtd_solver_lumerical(
        component=component,
        tech=tech,
        wavelength_start=1.5,
        wavelength_end=1.6,
        wavelength_points=100,
        modes=[1, 2],
        gpu=True,  # Enable GPU acceleration
        boundary=["PML", "PML", "Metal"],
        symmetry=[0, 0, 1]  # Mirror symmetry in z
    )
    
    # Run simulation
    solver.run()

Lumerical Specific Parameters:
- ``gpu``: Enable GPU acceleration (Lumerical 2024 syntax)
- ``boundary``: Boundary conditions for each axis
- ``symmetry``: Symmetry conditions (0=none, 1=symmetric, -1=anti-symmetric)

Field Monitor System
--------------------

Both solvers feature a modular field monitor system for electromagnetic field visualization:

Base Field Monitor
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The :class:`~gds_fdtd.solver.fdtd_field_monitor` provides the base functionality:

.. code-block:: python

    # Access field monitors
    for monitor in solver.field_monitors_objs:
        print(f"Monitor: {monitor.name} ({monitor.monitor_type})")
        
        # Check if data is available
        if monitor.has_data():
            # Visualize fields
            monitor.visualize(freq=freq, field_component='E')
            
            # Get monitor information
            print(monitor.get_field_info())

Tidy3D Field Monitors
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Tidy3D solvers use field monitors that work with Tidy3D's plotting functions:

.. code-block:: python

    # Visualize all field monitors
    solver.visualize_field_monitors()
    
    # Access individual monitors
    z_monitor = solver.get_field_monitor("z_field")
    if z_monitor and z_monitor.has_data():
        z_monitor.visualize(field_component='E')

Logging System
--------------

All solvers write detailed logs to files in the working directory:

.. code-block:: python

    # Logging is automatic - check working directory for log files
    import os
    log_files = [f for f in os.listdir(solver.working_dir) if f.endswith('.log')]
    print(f"Log files: {log_files}")
    
    # Manual logging
    solver.logger.info("Custom log message")

Log files contain:
- Detailed simulation setup information
- Parameter validation results
- Simulation progress and timing
- Error messages and debugging information
- Field monitor and S-parameter processing details

Solver Comparison
-----------------

.. list-table:: Solver Feature Comparison
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 30 35 35

   * - Feature
     - Tidy3D Solver
     - Lumerical Solver
   * - **Platform**
     - Cloud-based
     - Local/Commercial license
   * - **S-matrix Calculation**
     - ComponentModeler plugin
     - Built-in S-parameter sweep
   * - **Multi-modal Support**
     - Full TE/TM/conversion
     - Full TE/TM/conversion
   * - **GPU Acceleration**
     - Cloud automatic
     - Local GPU support
   * - **Field Visualization**
     - Enhanced Tidy3D plots
     - Lumerical native
   * - **Cost**
     - Pay-per-simulation
     - License required
   * - **Setup Complexity**
     - Minimal (cloud)
     - Installation required

Extending the Solver System
----------------------------

To add support for a new FDTD solver:

1. **Inherit from the base class:**

.. code-block:: python

    from gds_fdtd.solver import fdtd_solver
    
    class fdtd_solver_newsolver(fdtd_solver):
        def __init__(self, *args, **kwargs):
            super().__init__(*args, **kwargs)
            self.setup()

2. **Implement required abstract methods:**

.. code-block:: python

    def setup(self) -> None:
        """Setup the simulation."""
        self._validate_simulation_parameters()
        self._export_gds()
        # Solver-specific setup
        
    def run(self) -> None:
        """Run the simulation."""
        # Solver-specific execution
        
    def get_resources(self) -> None:
        """Get simulation resource requirements."""
        # Resource estimation
        
    def get_results(self) -> None:
        """Retrieve simulation results."""
        # Results processing
        
    def get_log(self) -> None:
        """Get simulation logs."""
        # Log retrieval

3. **Use modular components:**

.. code-block:: python

    # Create field monitors
    field_monitor = self.create_field_monitor_object("my_monitor", "z")
    
    # Access standardized ports
    for fdtd_port in self.fdtd_ports:
        # Port configuration using standardized interface
        pass

This modular approach ensures consistency across different solver backends while allowing for solver-specific optimizations and features.
